Create GAME_DESIGN_PRINCIPLES (#1466)
PixelGuys/Cubyz: GAME_DESIGN_PRINCIPLES.md

> # Cubyz is NOT a Survival Game!

Reviewer: Based on https://github.com/PixelGuys/Cubyz/pull/1466/files#r2094639633

```suggestion
# Cubyz is an Adventure Game, not Survival Game
```

**This is a key part of Cubyz game design, as it is what keeps it from being a survival game.**

**Examples:**
- A player has lost much health, and must risk what little life they have left to gather food. Note that the player cannot heal unless they have an accessory that consumes their energy. This is a situation the player has to face because of their own skill level.
- A player will not be attacked by monsters at night. They have to actively approach a monster-infested place such as a structure or cave. This is so they have free reign to do tasks during the night.
- A player summons an event that spawns waves of enemies to their base.

### Progression = Risk
In order to progress in the game, the player must take risks. The player is otherwise free to stay where they are in terms of progression.

**Examples:**
- The deeper the player goes into the world's caves, the more valuables they can find, but consequentially, the more monsters they'll come across.
- The player must defeat an enemy, boss, or event to obtain an item that helps them progress.
- In a multiplayer world, a player might have to attack an enemy player to rise up in power.

> # Break the Cycle

Reviewer: Actually, different though, you are defining Cubyz by what it is not, can you at least define it by making comparisons `Not X, but Y` so it is not all negatives? With this approach Cubyz will never have an identity, it will have non-identity.

### No Dimensions
Large dimension-like areas can be placed within the world itself, as it's immensely big already.
"Dimensions" such as an underworld and an overworld are already planned for the game.

> ### No Fast Travel

Reviewer: I think this is worded poorly. There will be fast travel, just not fast travel in a twisted sense games often use that term - to avoid saying its teleportation. In Cubyz it will be fast air travel, fast railway travel etc. I would suggest `No Teleportation`

These are tiny things the player does in between larger events; examples include:
- Travelling
- Parkour
- Mining
- Building
- Crafting
- Managing inventory
- Fighting

These moments are extremely important as they let the player mentally rest, so making sure they're as satisfying and consistent as possible is a must.

# Balancing
When balancing the game, keep in mind how players might interact with the world, the wildlife, and each other.

### 2OP4ME
At no point should the player be extremely hard to kill. Armor, tools, accessories, and buffs should be designed around aiding the player in skill-based encounters, not making them win regardless of skill.

### Trade-offs
If the player is given a powerful ability, then it should have an appropriate downside that forces them to use said ability or interact with other mechanics.

**Examples:**
- An accessory that gives the player a double-jump, but increases their fall damage.
- An accessory that heals the player, but takes away energy or some other resource.
- Armor that grants a lot of defense, but makes the player slow.
- A golden pickaxe is strong, but uses rare resources and is slow to swing.

### No Unbreakable Tools

> There should be no way to make tool last indefinitely.

Reviewer: You need to explain why. In Minecraft tool is an investment, one has to invest resources and time to make the tool great and then they don't want it to break. In Cubyz, a tool is just it - a tool. You make it, you use it, you throw it away, there is no long upgrade path for single tool, progression is horizontal, with tone of different combinations and materials, but after you make that tool it becomes a tool and there is no more investment to make. If it breaks, you just go to a cave to find more materials, they are waiting there, you don't have to grind XP for random enchants, in Cubyz all is deterministic.

### Explain when Needed
If something progress-related has no obvious explanation, the player will have to rely on a wiki to find out how to progress. One example is the bellows; players won't know to place it next to a furnace and jump on it repeatedly. The issue can be fixed by adding a tooltip that tells them how it works, while leaving out details they can intuitively find out themselves.

Having a mechanic that isn't explained or illuded to makes it an "Invisible Mechanic." These can only be found out through looking at the game's code, wiki reading, or asking a developer, thus giving a disadvantage to casual players. It's best to avoid these at all costs.

### Micro Moments
These are tiny things the player does in between larger events; examples include:
- Travelling
- Parkour
- Mining
- Building
- Crafting
- Managing inventory
- Fighting

These moments are extremely important as they let the player mentally rest, so making sure they're as satisfying and consistent as possible is a must.

### Make the World Feel Alive
To add immersion to the game, creatures should perform behaviors outside of player input, such as hunting, playing, migrating, eating, or sleeping.

> # Balancing

Reviewer: H2

When balancing the game, keep in mind how players might interact with the world, the wildlife, and each other.

### 2OP4ME
At no point should the player be extremely hard to kill. Armor, tools, accessories, and buffs should be designed around aiding the player in skill-based encounters, not letting them win regardless of skill.

### Trade-offs
If the player is given something to aid them, then it should have an appropriate take-away to balance it.

**Examples:**
- Using rare resources to create a strong tool.
- An accessory that heals the player, but takes away energy or some other resource.
- Enemies have strengths and weaknesses towards particular damage types

> # Little Details

Reviewer: This should be h2

### No Automation
Instead of staying in one place and farming everything, the player should have to take advantage of the infinite nature of the world to gain resources, meaning that a majority of resources are non-renewable.

### Mobs Don't Respawn
To prevent farming, mobs will not respawn naturally once killed. This will also make the player more aware that killing has long-term consequences in the area it occurs in.

### No Passive Animals
Instead of animals standing by to let you kill them, they will run from the player, attack back, and use defense mechanisms. This should make hunting and taming much more engaging.

### No Unbreakable Tools
In Minecraft, a tool is an investment you can make. You can enchant the tool, rename it, make it your own; there's an incentive to make it last forever with the use of mending. In Cubyz though, you are not creating an investment, but rather a tool to use until it breaks. If a player gets too attached to their tool, then they won't want to make other types of tools, and lower-tier materials will see less use as they will never be used in tool-making.

### Avoid Clutter

> Inventories in Minecraft will often fill up with random items that the player does not want, making their inventory hard to manage. To mitigate this, try finding uses for existing items before adding new ones, and find ways to prevent items from finding their way into a player's inventory when they don't want it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Inventories will often fill up with random items that the player does not want, making their inventory hard to manage. To mitigate this, try finding uses for existing items before adding new ones, and find ways to prevent items from finding their way into a player's inventory when they don't want it.
```

### Explain when Needed
If something progress-related has no obvious explanation, the player will have to rely on a wiki to find out how to progress. One example is the bellows; players won't know to place it next to a furnace and jump on it repeatedly. The issue can be fixed by adding a tooltip that tells them how it works, while leaving out details they can intuitively find out themselves.

Having a mechanic that isn't explained or illuded to makes it an "Invisible Mechanic." These can only be found out through looking at the game's code, wiki reading, or asking a developer, thus giving a disadvantage to casual players. It's best to avoid these at all costs.

### Micro Moments
These are tiny things the player does in between larger events; examples include:
- Travelling
- Parkour
- Mining
- Building
- Crafting
- Managing inventory
- Fighting

These moments are extremely important as they let the player mentally rest, so making sure they're as satisfying and consistent as possible is a must.

### Make the World Feel Alive

> To add immersion to the game, creatures should perform behaviors outside of player input, such as hunting, migrating, eating, or sleeping.

Reviewer 2: Very important point.
I've also thought about this a bit, and I've come to the conclusion that apart from these obvious behaviors, we also need a certain playful character as well to really get the immersion, e.g. how cats play with a mouse or how squirrels play catch with each other in the trees.

I guess  you can just add that to the list:
```suggestion
To add immersion to the game, creatures should perform behaviors outside of player input, such as hunting, playing, migrating, eating, or sleeping.
```

# Balancing
When balancing the game, keep in mind how players might interact with the world, the wildlife, and each other.

### 2OP4ME
At no point should the player be extremely hard to kill. Armor, tools, accessories, and buffs should be designed around aiding the player in skill-based encounters, not making them win regardless of skill.

### Trade-offs
If the player is given something to aid them, then it should have an appropriate take-away to balance it.

**Examples:**
- Using rare resources to create a strong tool.
- An accessory that heals the player, but takes away energy or some other resource.
- Enemies have strengths and weaknesses towards particular damage types

> ### Mob Greifing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Mob Griefing
```

> Creatures should not be able to grief players without their input. Destructive creatures are reserved for caves.

Reviewer 2: I partially disagree. When the player can make any area safe by defeating all of its mobs, then I think this would be fine, especially since the totems would offer additional protection.

Furthermore I think it would be fun to have a sort of player-summoned tower defense-style invasion, where the enemies would dig and bomb towards some central location, like the old ones army in terraria, but with actual destruction.

# Little Details

> The following contains spoilers for future content. If you are not looking into contributing, you should not read this section.

Reviewer 2: I would just put this disclaimer at the top, since I think this partially applies to the entire document, there are examples throughout.

Furthermore I would loosen the wording a bit so it's less strict:
```suggestion
This document is intended for contributors and may contain spoilers.
```

<details>
  <summary>Open Spoilers</summary>

### Big Trees vs Small Trees
There are two categories of trees, big and small. Big trees are designed to be built upon or left as decoration, whereas small trees are designed to be chopped down.

### World Building with Gameplay

> Gameplay elements have implications on the world's lore, and the same goes other way around. It's best to design the gameplay element first, and then apply the world's style to the element during implementation.

Reviewer 2: I think we have to be careful here, if we always go for gameplay without thinking about world building, then we will end up with a mess of fun gameplay features and no way to build a cohesive world around that.

### Vegetation
Vegetation should always fit the biome's climate. For example, Toadstools prefer humid areas, while Boletes prefer nutritious areas. Think about how a plant would fit into a biome or structure.

### Caves are Creepy and Mysterious
As the player goes deeper into Cubyz, they'll find that the music gets scarier, the monsters get harder and more disturbing, and the cave generation becomes an utter spectacle. We want the player to feel uneasy and stressed as they go down because it makes finding underground resources feel more rewarding.

### The Root
The Root is a cave located at a depth of -50000, sprawling with stone roots.

> This area is not required for progression, instead acting as a bonus challenge area that grants the player appropriate rewards for their current place in progression. It is the only area in the game (as of now) that will require a progression step to access, being an accessory that completely nullifies fall damage. As the player goes deeper, they'll find more curious areas that will put various skills to the test.

Reviewer 2: > This area is not required for progression

In my mind the root is the last step of the progression system. It is meant to be reachable in a normal play-through and I think we can make a couple of fun and mechanically unique bosses down there as well.

Reviewer 2: Yes, that should be an issue, and yeah I would love to have more fun post-endgame areas.
Though I suppose we should probably focus on the areas that the player can actually reach first.

# Cubyz is a Sandbox Game, not a Survival Game
The goal of this project is to create a game about exploration, adventure, and building. There is no looming threat of hunger or monsters; the player should be able to build in peace and choose how they would like to play. 

### Avoid Unavoidable Threats
A player should have to create or approach a threat on their own terms, rather than the threat approach them. This should allow the player to interact with whatever they want without feeling forced to.

**Examples:**
- A player will not be attacked by monsters at night. They have to actively approach a monster-infested place such as a structure or cave. This is so they have free reign to do activites during the night without being interrupted or frustrated.
- A player has lost much health, and must risk what little life they have left to gather food. Note that the player cannot heal unless they have an accessory that consumes their energy. This is a situation the player has to face because of their own skill level.
- A player summons an event that spawns waves of enemies to their base.

> 

Reviewer 2: Also please mention the fact that enemies won't respawn, so an area is generally safe after the player conquered it.

### Progression = Risk
In order to progress in the game, the player must take risks. The player is otherwise free to stay where they are in terms of progression.

**Examples:**
- The deeper the player goes into the world's caves, the more valuables they can find, but consequentially, the more monsters they'll come across.
- The player must defeat an enemy, boss, or event to obtain an item that helps them progress.

> - In a multiplayer world, a player might have to attack an enemy player to rise up in power.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- In a multiplayer world, a player could attack an enemy player to rise up in power.
```

# Break the Cycle
### No Dimensions
Instead of creating seperate dimensions, we can fit these places physically into Cubyz' massive world to allow the player to come across them on their own.

> "Dimensions" such as an underworld and an overworld are already planned for the game.

Reviewer 2: I would like to explictly see a mention of the root and sky islands here instead of the vague terms "underworld"/"overworld".

### Make the World Feel Alive

### Depth in Simplicity
Cubyz' special sauce is its simplicity. Keeping everything simple on the surface makes the game approachable for beginners, while the hidden depth keeps it interesting for skilled players. Avoid features that would add unnecessary tedium to the player's experience. Always think about how it would effect the player's first impressions of the game.

### Fuel the Player's Curiosity
The world is filled with secrets, and we want the player to find these secrets on their own without any outside help or guide.

### Problems have Multiple Solutions
Problems faced in a particular age of progression should have multiple solutions, instead of just one solution for everything.
For example, in the "Pre-Caves Age," the player will not have access to coal, as coal spawns low in the world and is shrouded in darkness. There's many solutions to this, however:
- Find a dim, above ground light source.
- Search for a cave with exposed coal.
- Wander into the darkness to find a cave that's bright enough to mine in.
- Find an above-ground structure that can grant the player coal.
- Dig straight down until you find coal.

> Of course, this problem is completely solved as soon as the player gets coal, as they can now explore caves to find more coal with their newfound torches, but it's important that the player has these options in the first place so they can have more freedom. Not one option is better or easier than the other, and if one turns out to be, then it should be allowed to be adjusted to encourage other methods.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of course, this problem is completely solved as soon as the player gets coal, as they can now explore caves to find more coal with their newfound torches, but it's important that the player has these options in the first place to prevent them from getting stuck on a seemingly insurmountable barrier. This also gives them more freedom in how they can approach the game. Not one option is better or easier than the other, and if one turns out to be, then it should be allowed to be adjusted to encourage other methods.
```

### Micro Moments
These are tiny things the player does in between larger events; examples include:
- Travelling
- Parkour
- Mining
- Building
- Crafting
- Managing inventory
- Fighting

These moments are extremely important as they let the player mentally rest, so making sure they're as satisfying and consistent as possible is a must.

# Balancing
When balancing the game, keep in mind how players might interact with the world, the wildlife, and each other.

### 2OP4ME
At no point should the player be extremely hard to kill. Armor, tools, accessories, and buffs should be designed around aiding the player in skill-based encounters, not making them win regardless of skill.

### Trade-offs
If the player is given something to aid them, then it should have an appropriate take-away to balance it.

**Examples:**
- Using rare resources to create a strong tool.
- An accessory that heals the player, but takes away energy or some other resource.

> - Armor that grants a ton of defense, but makes the player slow.

Reviewer 2: Armor should never make the player slow, at least not in terms of movement speed.

Reviewer: I would suggest less concrete descriptions of mechanics which are still in development and we're not reality checked. Instead of giving examples poor some water and make the description softer. Don't say you will be slow, say that there will be a trade-off, that progression is horizontal.

> 

Reviewer 2: I think one important thing that's missing in the above two points is the existence of different damage types.

- The player must defeat an enemy, boss, or event to obtain an item that helps them progress.
- In a multiplayer world, a player might have to attack an enemy player to rise up in power.

# Break the Cycle
### No Dimensions
Instead of creating seperate dimensions, we can fit these places physically into Cubyz' massive world to allow the player to come across them on their own.
"Dimensions" such as an underworld and an overworld are already planned for the game.

### No Teleportation
To immerse the player and let them feel the sense of scale the world of Cubyz has, teleportation is not allowed, as the player will see less of the world that way.

### No Automation
Instead of staying in one place and farming everything, the player should have to take advantage of the infinite nature of the world to gain resources.

### No Generic Creatures
(WIP)

### No Passive Animals
Instead of animals standing by to let you kill them, they will run from the player, attack back, and use defense mechanisms. This should make hunting and taming much more engaging.

> ### Spawn Points --> Check Points

Reviewer 3: Obviously the player shouldn't be able to set their spawn _when_ ever they want, but they should be able to set their spawn _where_ ever they want. 
If you can only set your spawn at preexisting structures, the player is forced to only live at one of those, which is unfun.
A consumable would be annoying, since respawning is something you do a lot.
I would have some sort of multiblock thing that is too complicated/large and expensive to just place whenever you want, encouraging you to only have it in your personal base.
